[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THROAT SINGING]
>> I was eight.
My parents came home
from the hospital
and said Dorothy is dead.
My sister is dead.
Someone turned off
the light within me.
It was pitch black.
Why life?
How can I accept
the unacceptable?
My quest has begun.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[PEOPLE CHANTING]
[BELL RINGING]
Since she died, I
have pretended to be
alive to the joys, worries,
and pleasures of everyday life.
Despite the years that have gone
by, I see that I cannot live
with her, and I cannot
live without her.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
A Tibetan friend, Jampa,
told me about the Buddha
and his first teaching
on the Four Noble
Truths that are supposed
to free from suffering.
He also told me about an
ancient ritual which leads
to serenity and enlightenment.
Kalachakra was getting
into resonance with me.
That is what led
me to Dharamshala,
this uncommon Indian city
where the Tibetans live happily
and joyfully despite
the pain of exile.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> I am happy and worried,
as often, I am unsatisfied.
Deep down inside me, I still
miss Dorothy's presence.
Sometimes I pretend
to laugh, to have fun.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Excuse me.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> What's happening here?
Some preparation?
Something special?
>> This is Kalachakra Temple.
And they are preparing
for a Kalachakra ritual.
>> Is this the
Kalachakra statue?
>> Yes, yes.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> What does the
young monk want?
>> He's interested in
Kalachakra teaching.
>> [CHUCKLING]
But he's very young.
>> He's very young, yes.
Thank you so much.
>> OK, welcome.
>> Goodbye.
Thank you.
Goodbye.
Jampa will introduce me
to Thamthog Rinpoche,
the abbot of the monastery
of the Dalai Lama.
He is believed to
be the reincarnation
of a great master.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
It's very nice to meet you.
I'm so honored to meet you.
>> Thank you, me too.
>> You're the abbot
of this monastery?
>> Yes.
>> Since how long?
>> Four years.
>> Nice.
>> And where are you from?
>> I'm from France.
>> Oh, bonjour.
>> Bonjour.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> You are very
interested in Kalachakra?
>> Yes.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[MONKS CHANTING]
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> All this is wonderful,
even intriguing.
But I still feel lonely, cut
off from myself and the joy
that this spectacle
could bring me.
I can feel my ignorance, which
is certainly the underlying
cause of my suffering.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[MONKS CHANTING]
[MAN'S VOICE OVER CROWD]
[BIRD CHIRPING]
[BELL RINGING]
[SINGING BOWLS, DRUMS, THROAT
SINGING]
[FEMALE VOCALS]
>> People are coming
from all directions.
Everyone finds their
place, settles in.
A fervor begins to develop.
And the mandala is taking shape.
[MONKS CHANTING]
[CAR HORN]
[CAR HORNS]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> To my great joy, my request,
with the monastery abbot,
for an audience with the
Dalai Lama has been granted.
His laughter, his kindness--
he even says to me, how nice
of you to come and see me.
When I think of all he has gone
through, I feel very small.
But I'm still growing.
>> I received initiation of
this Kalachakra tantra from
my senior tutor.
I also received full
monk's ordination from him.
He said something like--
he offered his
students, then me,
the possibility of
teaching the mandala.
Please, now bless him
and carry teaching
of this tantric teaching to
many people for a long time.
So while he prayed to
the mandala for me,
he also was very much moved--
tears.
>> Yes.
>> So now, almost, I
think, 32 or 33 initiations
of the Kalachakra...
I've done.
So I always feel
that's the fulfillment
of his prayer at that time.
With very strong--
[SPEAKING TIBETAN]-- emotion.
[TIBETAN HORNS]
[APPLAUSE]
[SNYCHRONIZED CLAPPING]
As a Buddhist, this place has
something very sacred place.
Buddha Shakyamuni achieved
enlightenment of Buddhahood
in this very place.
Of course, everybody
knows Buddha--
like many other great
teachers, Buddha
was a symbol of peace,
a symbol of love.
Now, in such a sacred
place, I am receiving
Gandhi's granddaughter.
Very, very special significance.
I very much appreciate.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
Now my age is 76.
But the remainder
of my life, I'm
totally committed to
non-violence and serving.
As a Buddhist practitioner, try
to serve every sentient being,
and particularly, about
seven billion human beings
on this planet.
I'm one of them,
nothing special.
We are all the
same human beings.
So non-violence is the
reflection of inner peace.
The real peaceful world, then,
I think, will be achieved.
It is possible!
I think this is the right time.
Make effort with the vision
to create a better world,
a peaceful world.
Whenever we face
some problem, we
must solve it through dialogue,
through peaceful means,
through non-violent ways.
So people should
know the real method
to get happy life,
not through money,
not through power, but through
honest, truthful compassion.
[SCRAPING]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Where's the sand coming from?
>> The sand we
make by ourselves.
So this sand is from soft rock.
And then we crush
it and we wash it.
>> How do your crush it?
>> Like, with a hard
rock, with another rock.
>> Oh, you crush it like this?
>> Yes.
And then we wash it, and
mix it with the color.
[SCRAPING]
>> You don't have any
support or copy to do it?
>> Copy-- yeah, actually, before
we have to memorize this--
all the lines and
then the drawing.
We have to learn it before
drawing the mandala.
>> So you have it in your head?
>> Yes, we have to memorize it.
>> All the mandala?
>> Yes.
>> But there are
so many details.
>> Yes, it's actually
all written in scripture.
So if we can memorize
the scripture entirely,
then we can do it.
>> How are you chosen
to make the mandala?
>> Just, we write our
names on a paper--
>> And we draw it.
>> --all the monks.
And we just draw it, and
we pick it up like that.
>> Can all the monks put
a ticket to be chosen?
>> After completing
the memorizing class,
only then you have
to write your name.
>> How long is the class?
>> It depends.
From--
>> If you're very smart--
>> Just one year.
>> --yeah, finish in one year.
>> One and a half years.
For students not that
smart, four or five years.
>> What about you?
Very smart?
>> I'm not that smart.
Six years in the
memorizing class.
[LAUGHTER]
[SCRAPING]
[MONK CHANTING]
[MONKS CHANTING]
>> I am Kalachakra.
I was born in the foothills
of the Himalayas long ago.
I am peace.
I am pure consciousness.
I am the wheel of
time, which has
neither a beginning or an end.
Through rituals and
prayers, I show you
the way to release pain,
to achieve the waking
state, the state of Buddhahood.
Each of you is a
potential Buddha.
And together, we will
slowly and gently
remove all the
veils of ignorance
and enter the mandala,
my heavenly palace,
where I manifest when His
Holiness, the Dalai Lama,
calls me.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> It was through the word
of the great Buddha that I
appeared originally to the
first King of Shambhala
as an initiation.
Have you heard of Shambhala,
this ideal secret city so
light, so ethereal that
only a few great yogis
have had the joy of seeing?
It as a place of peace
and absolute union.
To the naked eye, you
cannot see the city.
Many even take this
place for a myth.
And yet--
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> His Holiness the Dalai
Lama takes advantage
of your presence to prepare
you to receive the fundamental
teaching of Tibetan Buddhism.
Then you can become
a fertile base.
This is essential.
Like building a house, you
must prepare the ground,
take measure, and ensure
the foundations are solid.
>> I have this trick whenever
I give this sort of initiation.
The Kalachakra initiation,
many people are attracted,
so many people come.
My actual interest
is, before initiation,
some basic explanation
about Buddhism and tantra.
I consider this the
most important part.
But if, right from
the beginning, I say,
oh, I will give some
sort of teaching,
the basics of Buddhist
teachings and tantra,
not a big number will come.
Usually, you see, people
love initiation, but not
real teaching.
So you see, create
the impression, "Oh,
the Kalachakra initiation!"
Then, a large number
of people will come.
Then, actually, before the
initiation, for at least three
or four days, I give teaching.
I usually consider
that is most important.
How to practice this
level step by step,
step by step, like that.
That's, of course--
>> Good trick.
>> --a little trick, but
I think, a positive trick,
not a negative trick.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Bodh Gaya-- it
is powerful here.
And there is a sentence that
I can hear continuously--
may love reign in the
hearts of all beings.
May love reign in the
Jampa tells me
that walking around
the Stupa of the Great Awakening
can grant wishes and prayers.
I miss Dorothy so much.
So I pray.
please, release
me from this pain.
I become aware that
I'm the only one who
can change this feeling of
anger and injustice in me.
Nobody can do the job for me.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> My commitment is essential.
I have to study and practice,
giving a positive way
to each of my thoughts.
Jampa will explain to me
the philosophical debates.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[LAUGHTER]
[SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> [CHANTING]
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
[BELL RINGING]
>> He's right, I have
to cleanse my thoughts.
I should stop looking for
culprit for my sister's death.
It was no one's
fault. I am finally
going to be able to forgive--
forgive myself and be forgiven.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Wherever I go, if I listen to
myself, the pain speaks to me.
When I turn towards
others, it calms me down.
I am eager to meet
Jampa's friend.
Their presence
makes me feel good.
Have you lived in
Dharamsala long?
>> Yeah, I've lived in
Dharamsala for one year.
>> One year?
>> Yeah.
>> Where are you from?
>> I'm from Bhutan, Thimphu.
>> Did you choose
to become a monk?
>> I chose to become a monk.
>> And your family was happy?
>> Yeah, my family was so
happy about this decision.
>> I'm so thirsty.
You want to drink something?
>> OK.
You're not missing
your mommy too much?
>> Yeah, I miss my mommy.
>> Oh, here you are.
Hello.
>> Natalie, this is Tenzin.
>> Hello, Tenzin.
Very nice to meet you.
>> Nice to meet you too.
>> This is Khetsun,
Tenzin, and Jampa.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> She's beautiful.
>> Thank you.
>> She was Miss
Tibet 2010, you know?
>> Oh, OK.
>> But she's very spiritual and
studies Buddhist philosophy.
>> Oh, really?
How can you manage between
glamour life and spirituality?
Not so easy, no?
>> You know, even
though I'm Miss Tibet,
and I'm a little bit
in the glamour world,
but I'm a human being, you know?
I seek happiness,
like all others.
And the fact that I practice
Buddhism, the spiritual path,
it really helps me to have
a calm and peaceful life.
>> I'm seeking peace too.
How long have you
known each other?
>> For two or three years,
we've know each other.
>> But I'm still
waiting for her answer.
>> I'm confused.
>> Yeah, but I think you should
go and see some high lama
or oracle and receive
their blessing, you know?
>> OK.
>> How does it work?
You go and see a lama,
and you ask to be guided?
Or how does it work?
>> In Tibetan
tradition and culture,
when you have difficulties,
or important decisions to be
taken, then you can ask
a high lama or master,
and ask for their
advice and instruction,
so that you can be guided
in a correct and good way.
>> Do you know,
personally, the oracle?
>> Yeah, I know him
very well, you know?
So he's a little bit
like my spiritual master
and spiritual guide.
>> Oh.
You know him?
>> Yes, I know him.
>> I would love
to meet him also.
>> I think you can come with me.
>> Wow.
>> Yes.
To meet oracle, we need kata--
we'll buy from
here-- for blessing.
[SPEAKING TIBETAN]
It's 50.
>> 50.
>> We'll buy two.
>> OK.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Good.
Thank you very much.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Hello.
>> Bonjour.
>> How are you?
Good?
>> I'm fine, thank you.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[CHANTING]
[GONG]
>> Oh, what is
written on the stones?
>> It's a Buddhist holy mantra.
Om mani padme hum.
>> Om mani padme hum?
[CHANTING UNDER BREATH]
>> When I was 17 years old, it
was my strong wish to become
a nun, you know?
>> No.
>> Yes.
>> You wanted to become a nun?
>> Yeah.
At that time, I was
quite young, you know?
I was 17, as I told you.
And I don't know, I really--
it was a strong wish to become
a nun, and practice dharma,
and to achieve nirvana.
>> And why didn't
you become a nun?
>> Since I was too young, and
I asked my parents, you know?
So they said no.
Because we already
have two monks.
My two brothers are monks.
So they said to me to continue
my studies in my public school.
So I listened to them.
>> You still want to be a nun?
>> Yes.
>> I thought you were
engaged to Jampa.
So you're still searching?
>> I really feel that way,
but I'm stuck between the two
decisions, you know, to become
a nun and live a completely
spiritual life, or to get
married and have children,
and a normal life.
>> Are there nunneries
in Dharamsala?
>> Yeah, there are almost
three, four nunneries.
In the history of Tibet,
the majority were monks.
But now things are changing.
And we can see more and
more Tibetan women studying
and practicing Buddhism.
And they are becoming
nuns as well.
And you can see more Tibetan
dharma institutes and nunneries
as well.
[GONG]
[CHANTING]
[CHATTER]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[GONG]
[CHANTING]
[DRAMYINS]
[SINGING]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> In this preparatory phase,
we first examine the results
of throwing sticks that
shows the types of obstacles
to overcome, and then continue
through the distribution
of consecrated blessed water,
which purifies the three gates
of the body, the
speech, and the mind.
Following the distribution
of kusha, two sprays of herbs
that purify all
negatives overnight
and clarify your dreams.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Now we proceed to the
distribution of cord protection
with three knots.
It is red, symbolizing
Maitreya, the Buddha of love,
who protects you from all
evil thoughts, internally
and externally,
of all obstacles.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Then, to remove all
obstacles up to the time
of the initiation,
before you sleep,
you will recite the mantra
protector of the six families.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[CHANTING]
>> Ketzin's serenity
impresses me.
When I ask him, what
you want to do in life,
despite his young age, he simply
replies, be helpful to others,
be a good person.
>> It is good to do kora.
>> Yes, walking around the
monastery of His Holiness
the Dalai Lama, it's good.
>> Yeah.
>> How many times you do it?
>> Three times.
>> Three times a day?
>> Yeah.
Yesterday I dreamed
of Nechung Kuten-la.
>> The oracle?
>> Yeah, and also
of Palden Lhamo.
>> In the same dream?
>> Yes.
>> What did he do, the oracle?
>> He was in a trance.
[CHANTING]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[TINGSHA]
[DRUMS]
[CHANTING]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> What was the
nature of your dreams?
If you have dreamt of a
spiritual master or Buddha,
it bodes well.
In this dimension of the dream,
you can see the clear light.
It is the true nature
of the mind that
appears at the moment of death.
It is pure consciousness,
without subject or object.
Training ourselves
by practicing dreams
allows us to recognize
this fundamental light
at the time of death,
and thus attain
the state of enlightenment.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> We are at the entrance
of the mandala, my palace.
Reaffirm your
commitment to attain
the perfect enlightenment
for the sake of all beings.
You will now lift the
veil of ignorance that
covers your unpurified mind.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Purified, you then
enter, with eyes open,
into my supreme city of
the great liberation.
That is my mandala, with
five floors consisting
of a center, and outer circle,
and a periphery or four doors
whose colors are associated
with the cardinal directions,
and my four faces.
The mandala contains
722 deities.
We enter the body mandala,
then the mandala of speech,
then into the mandala
of mind, containing
the mandala of wisdom,
to reach the mandala
of bliss, where I remain with my
consort, my feminine principle.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> You have entered
the body mandala.
You are like a
newborn, and can now
receive the seven initiations
similar to events in childhood.
>> [CHANTING]
>> First, let's proceed
to the water initiation,
symbolizing the first bath the
mother gives to her newborn.
This is the purification
of the body.
Next is the crown
initiation, which
is associated to the first
haircut of the child.
The hair is sometimes
compared to thousands
of threads that bind us
to samsara that we cut
when taking the monastic vows.
This is how one is freed from
self-centered appropriation.
The silk ribbon
initiation, corresponding
with the development of the
embryo within the matrix--
it cleanses the psychophysical
defilements circulating
in our subtle system.
It is associated with the act
of piercing the ears of a child,
giving their first jewelry.
The Vajra and bell
initiation corresponds
to when the child begins
to laugh and articulate
sounds, allowing them
the ability to achieve,
in the future, the
enlightened word of Buddha.
In the last three
initiations, the one
of the conduct
initiation correlates
to the first pleasures
a child takes
in the discovery of the
world of the senses.
You are qualified
to have the right
to conduct and use objects
without any attachments.
The name initiation
corresponds to the name
that the child receives.
It purifies the
faculties of action.
Last, the permission
initiation corresponds
to the first reading
lesson of the child.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> During the initiation,
the Dalai Lama continuously
repeats, "Give, give without
waiting for anything in return.
You will receive so much
more than what you gave."
I gave a leaf of the Bodhi
tree, the tree under which
the Buddha awakened.
I have received so much more.
When I have no expectations,
the surprises multiply.
My obsessive quest for happiness
dissipates little by little.
When I follow the flow
of life, I feel peaceful.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[BELL RINGING]
>> On the oracle's advice
Tenzin traveled to [INAUDIBLE]
to clear away her
doubts and confusion.
Her beauty and delicacy
touched me as a sister would,
my sister.
Which path will she take?
Whatever she decides, it
will be the path of love.
[APPLAUSE]
[CHANTING]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> We conclude with the
initiation of the Vajra master,
transmitted through
the initiation vase,
symbolizing achievement and lack
of differentiation of the body,
the speech, and the
mind in a unique flavor.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Now, let yourself
feel divine pride.
I am Kalachakra.
I am the non-time that includes
the three times, past, present,
and future.
There is neither
beginning nor end.
Birth and death, the
beginning and the end,
seem opposite in appearance.
However, there is continuity.
Integrate these
opposites, and live fully.
Fight ignorance.
Cultivate enlightenment.
My wish is that all
of you become Buddhas.
And by the power
of this initiation,
it is certain that one day,
sooner or later, each of you
will become a Buddha.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[APPLAUSE]
>> My children, my
family, they are alive.
It's time to go home.
I want to live.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Sooner or later, we will
all die, some too early.
This is the mystery of life, the
mystery of time, impermanence.
Nothing lasts forever.
The destruction of the mandala
symbolizes this so well.
Ketzin takes me, with
his young friend,
to a secret place where
he likes to seek refuge
from the world and meditate.
Nobody is forcing me to suffer.
No good can come out of
it, neither for my sister,
nor for me.
This is clear.
It is time for me to accept--
to accept.
Her existence is not confined
to a physical existence.
She appears in so many ways.
I thought that someone had left.
Something is freed inside me.
Memories of our childhood
come back to me.
Yes, Dorothy, it's
you, the joy of life
that I finally will
come forever and always.
[MUSIC PLAYING]